---
title: The role of digitalization
---
With digitalization is intended the structuring of disparate domains of social life around digital communication (Brennen and Kreiss, 2016). Due to digital media being able to simulate other media, societal and cultural processes start converging. Specifically, a process of digitalization implies several degrees of convergence: among infrastructures, markets, devices, and so on (ibid., p. 7). In the case of journalism, this convergence is both functional and rhetorical, meaning that digital media are able to perform functions and cultural forms that are typical of the newspaper. News are written and published on online platforms, either on the digital edition of a newspaper or on third-parties platforms (Newman, 2023). Social media like Instagram and TikTok have continuously grown in the past years to be trusted as news outlets, especially among very young audiences (ibid.). This accelerating transition towards digital consumption has primarily affected the form of news. Online articles do not include exclusively static blocks of text and visuals anymore, but they contain (and are contained within) a plethora of multimedia artifacts – like video, podcasts, and interactive visuals (ibid.). This range of new forms, distributed across several platforms where metrics such as engagement are fundamental, has prompted publishers and journalists to rethink how news is produced and distributed to make their content more attractive and entertaining (Bielik and Višňovský, 2021). 

From the perspective of content, digitization and datafication play fundamental roles in how information is sourced in the news-making process. Digitization is the technical process of converting information from analog to digital (Brennen and Kreiss, 2016). Datafication refers to the ever-growing availability of data in many domains of private, social, and public life (van Dijk, 2014) mainly due to the digitalization and digitization of services and media environments (Loosen et al., 2020). Over the last decades, datafication has become a paradigm in science and society for understanding sociality and social behavior (van Dijk, 2014); its main resource is data, often seen as the “raw” material to make sense of large and abstract social and environmental phenomena (ibid.). Data are units of information, namely the smallest unit possible. Within the paradigm of datafication, data are the building block of knowledge needed to validate empirical facts. 

The ongoing process of datafication has been beneficial in granting journalists access to an unprecedented amount of data in a digitized form, including historical documents, scientific reports, or sensitive records. For journalists, the possibility of harvesting data about a phenomenon – collect, store, analyze them – opened up new avenues for conducting their work (Hahn and Stalph, 2021). Within this paradigm journalists make sense of  – or even collect and produce –  data, in order to keep a relevant role in observing the unfolding of contemporary phenomena (Loosen et al., 2020). To do so, a new mindset has become part of newsrooms, changing the way in which journalism is conducted. In the last decade, journalists have created software, tools, and developed or borrowed techniques from a variety of other fields to work with data (Hahn and Stalph, 2021). These fields include – but are not limited to –  computer science, engineering, and design.